---
layout: default
title: Join
categories: misc
join: true
---
The Wadhwa lab has multiple, funded positions in our new laboratory in the Center for Mechanisms of Evolutions and the Department of Physics at Arizona State University. We are currently recruiting motivated, creative, and curiosity-driven scientists to join our growing team. 

We are a highly multidisciplinary group working on a variety of topics at the interface of physics, biology, and engineering. Our goal as a group is to provide a fun and inclusive space where every team member can do their best science. We value diversity, curiosity, debate, and collaboration. See below for instructions on how to apply.

### Postdoctoral Fellows
We are looking for a highly motivated postdoctoral fellow to join our team. Please [email Navish](mailto:Navish.Wadhwa@asu.edu) with your CV, a cover letter including a brief description of your research interests and/or project ideas, background, and future career goals. Please also provide contact information of 3 references or arrange for your references to send their letters directly to Navish. 

### Graduate Students
If you are a prospective graduate student interested in joining our laboratory, please [email Navish](mailto:Navish.Wadhwa@asu.edu) with a short cover letter describing your research interests, career goals, and what got you interested in our lab. Please also include a CV along with contact information of 2-3 references.

### Research Technicians
If you are interested in joining us as a research technician, [please email Navish](mailto:Navish.Wadhwa@asu.edu) with a cover letter and resume. In the cover letter, please describe your research interests, technical skills, and an emphasis on why you believe the Wadhwa Lab is the right fit for you.

### ASU undergraduates
If you are interested in performing research in our lab, please [email Navish](mailto:Navish.Wadhwa@asu.edu). Please include a CV/resume, transcript, and a brief description of your research interests, background, and future career goals. 

